---
layout: post
title: "PITSA: Personal IT Security Advices"
date: 2023-05-20
update: 2023-05-20
category: blog
tags: security
image: https://www.logsign.com/uploads/cyber_security_protocols_c1974fb1ed.png
---

I am not an IT security expert, so treat this article as such. What I am trying to achieve here, is to collect some objectively good practices to enharden your private personal security IT-wise.

It is important not just for your mental health, but losing access to your IT world, being hacked and robbed... or getting extorted by any chance... 

You have to defend yourself, no doubt. Not just for your sake, but your little IT bubble contains data about other people as well. Your friends' and families' phone numbers, pictures, calendar events, and addresses. At this point you, being hacked could threaten their physical health as well!

### What can I do?

Fortunately, plenty of things. If you reading this post, you are on a good path. The first step of `awareness`. Good job!
Now you have a responsibility to spread the knowledge... and I hate to say this, but share this article.

The following list contains some very foundational practices to use. Some of them are mandatory, and some of them are nice to have.
I do not maintain order between the points, but trying to show you the low-hanging fruits and the next level of security as well.

#### Password Manager
One of the **important** stuff. I would say mandatory, but there are other ways.
However, using a password manager is undoubtedly useful.

The point is, to have a unique password for every instance where you would use a password. In this case, when (definitely not if) one of these instances got compromised and your password will leak, you just will have one password to forget about. Change it, you are in the clear water.

You could use some strategy in your head, from a base password how you would iterate passwords for separate instances, but I generally do not recommend this. Hard to keep, hard to maintain. You have to come up with new ideas as time is telling, rules change, and sites got hacked.

**Suggestion**: You probably could use any software for this, the three biggest ones are perhaps `BitWarden`, `1Password` and `LastPass`.
I would not recommend the last one, I heard too many successful hacks on that company. Personally, I use BitWarden now (open-source), but to be honest I have accessibility problems with them right now.
`Psono` could be a great alternative too, if you have the skill set to use it.

#### Multi-Factor Authentication
**Inevitable**. I cannot emphasize the significance of this feature. If you have the opportunity to enable this, DO IT.

Having an MFA means that somebody with your password cannot log in without a second factor. It is usually a one-time password generated upon some shared keys between you and the instance you trying to log in.

**Suggestion**: if you can do so, **do not use SMS** as MFA. It is a generally non-secure channel and potentially could be hacked.
Not to mention, what if you lose the number?

#### Updates
Yeah, I know. Everybody knows this. Update your software. But not just speak about it, do it. Frequently.
If you got security updates, **immediately**.
**Suggestion**: It seems very convenient to store this method in your password manager as well, but think about it. _Would not it degrade your setup to one factor?_
Using different software, like `Google Authenticator`, or `Aegis` (open-source) is the way. I using both of them (work and personal stuff separated).

#### Disk Encryption
It is so important, yet, nobody really cares. Just imagine, if your laptop (or PC) would be stolen. If your disk is not encrypted, your data is public.
They could save everything from the disk: the data from your browser, from your other applications, your pictures, your docs.
Turn this feature on. Please, I am begging you.

**Suggestion**: It is something your operating system does. If it lacks this feature, upgrade it. Seriously.
**Trust me, it is definitely worth that few euros.**

### Hardware/Physical Security
Hardware security is generally about enforcing software security with a hardware component. Sometimes it is the next level, but sometimes it is so a low-hanging item, you definitely should pick it.

#### Hardware keys
Because we are speaking about hardware elements, it requires money. Hardware keys help you extend your MFA with a virtually non-accessible component. Meaning, your attacker should have physical access to your key.

**Suggestion**: I believe the industry standard is to use `Yubikeys`. Easy to use, quite cheap. Be sure, that you have backup keys or you could lose access to your stuff.
And of course, if you lose your key: delete it from everywhere you did save it.

#### Kensington
This lock type is a nice-to-have. I have never seen it in personal use. However, it could be very useful during a theft.

It physically locks your device into the furniture (in better case to the building itself) and could be opened only by your physical keys.

### More awareness
Knowing tricks and techniques is a good thing. But you need to understand what are the reasons behind these methods.
If you understand why you take a measurement, it makes you understand the problem you could have encountered... and it makes you able to apply similar logic to new and unfamiliar cases.

I have a few simple examples:

#### Public Internet Access
I mean, if you go to a café, gym, school... you would probably connect to the local Wi-Fi to save your cellular budget.
Makes sense, but you should know if you were able to connect... other people could connect as well, and they could be malicious and they could monitor the traffic.

Wireless technology is not too secure. And I am not speaking about only Wi-Fi, but also Bluetooth as well.

**Suggestion**: use a physical cable connection if you can. Sure, if you are listening to a publicly available podcast, that is probably not a big issue to be eavesdropped on... but imagine if your very confidential meeting is leaking out because of the accumulation of used wireless technologies.
Using VPN is also a well-founded method to protect yourself.

**Suggestion #2**: Disable plain HTTP connections in your browser, or operating system. Probably your browser and your Internet Security system (formerly known as an antivirus, nowadays they do a lot more than that) will do it for you, but be aware: **use only HTTPS connections**. (unless you are a technical person and you know exactly what you are doing)

#### Identity Protection
This will be a little bit far-fetched, but there are accounts of yours that are more important than other accounts. If you could recollect, there are multiple spaces where you can log in with your `Google`/`Facebook`/`Microsoft`/etc accounts. Extremely valuable accounts, I have to say.
And as such, you should protect them accordingly.

Imagine if somebody could take over these accounts. How messed up you are then?

**Suggestion**: Use multi-level protection on these accounts. All of the suggestions above are a good start, though, you should go further.
For example, if you are using Google as your identity, you could enrol for the [Google Advanced Protection] program and put stronger measurements into effect.

You also could apply something similar to your password manager (like using hardware keys to log in).

#### Virtual Cards
Never use 

### Retrospect
Think about what level of security your life needs, but objectively speaking:
> There is not enough security in the world to protect you completely.

If you are not a target, okay, you could settle with less defence... but consider this:
If your acquaintances or family members are targets because they are working for the government, finance companies, or just holding cryptocurrencies. That would make you a target as well.

Protect yourself and your environment!

[Google Advanced Protection]: https://landing.google.com/advancedprotection/
